Add documentation for STATS-BY-ALL and WITHOUT (#147152)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/_snippets/commands/layout/ts.md

If there is no `STATS` command in the query, the output of the `TS` command gets sorted by `@timestamp` in descending order by default. This helps listing recent values across many time series, as opposed to listing the results based on index sort configuration that may just return data points for a single time series.

## Grouping time series [grouping-time-series]

When the first `STATS` after `TS` uses a bare
[time series aggregation function](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/time-series-aggregation-functions.md)
(that is, a time series function not wrapped in an outer aggregation such as `AVG()` or `SUM()`),

> the rows are implicitly grouped by **every** [dimension](docs-content://manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md#time-series-dimension)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the rows are implicitly grouped by **all** [dimensions](docs-content://manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md#time-series-dimension)
```

> of the targeted time series indices. The result set includes a `_timeseries` `keyword`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of each time series. The result set includes a `_timeseries` `keyword`
```

Reviewer: We should also clarify that this includes only the dimensions per time series, not all dimensions available in the index mappings.

column that contains a JSON-encoded object with the dimension key/value pairs
identifying each group. For an example, refer to [Group by all dimensions implicitly](#group-by-all-dimensions-implicitly).

You can make this grouping explicit, or narrow it to a subset of dimensions, using the
[`WITHOUT`](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/without.md)

> grouping function in the `BY` clause ({applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
grouping function in the `BY` clause ({applies_to}`stack: preview 9.4`):
```

- `BY WITHOUT(dim1, dim2, ...)` groups by **all** dimensions **except** those listed.
  See [Exclude dimensions with WITHOUT](#exclude-dimensions-with-without).
- `BY WITHOUT()` (no arguments) explicitly groups by every dimension; it is equivalent
  to the implicit "group by all" behavior.

When combining a bare time series function with other groupings, only grouping functions
(such as [`TBUCKET`](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/tbucket.md)
or `WITHOUT`) are allowed in the `BY` clause — bare dimension columns are not.
For example, `TS k8s | STATS rate(network.total_bytes_in) BY host` is rejected; use
`BY TBUCKET(1 hour)` or wrap the time series function with an outer aggregation instead.

::::{note}

> `WITHOUT` can only be used inside a `TS` pipeline. Using it in a `FROM | STATS ... BY WITHOUT(...)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`WITHOUT` can only be used inside the first `STATS` command under `TS` source. Using it in a `FROM | STATS ... BY WITHOUT(...)`
```

> query is rejected by the analyzer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
query leads to a error.
```

## Grouping time series [grouping-time-series]

When the first `STATS` after `TS` uses a bare
[time series aggregation function](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/time-series-aggregation-functions.md)
(that is, a time series function not wrapped in an outer aggregation such as `AVG()` or `SUM()`),
the rows are implicitly grouped by **all** [dimensions](docs-content://manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md#time-series-dimension)
of each time series. The result set includes a `_timeseries` `keyword`
column that contains a JSON-encoded object with the dimension key/value pairs
identifying each group. Only the dimensions that are actually present for a given time
series are included — not every dimension declared in the index mappings — so different
rows in the result may carry different dimension keys. For an example, refer to
[Group by all dimensions implicitly](#group-by-all-dimensions-implicitly).

You can make this grouping explicit, or narrow it to a subset of dimensions, using the
[`WITHOUT`](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/without.md)

> grouping function in the `BY` clause ({applies_to}`stack: preview 9.4`):

Reviewer 2: `WITHOUT` [uses](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/51136b52c3c454897aeac8324aecc283269bace9/x-pack/plugin/esql/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/xpack/esql/analysis/TimeSeriesGroupByAll.java#L86) the same machinery as group-by-all so we can GA it.

Reviewer: Coold, let's remove "preview" from this pr.

Author: Done!

- `BY WITHOUT(dim1, dim2, ...)` groups by **all** dimensions **except** those listed.
  See [Exclude dimensions with WITHOUT](#exclude-dimensions-with-without).
- `BY WITHOUT()` (no arguments) explicitly groups by every dimension; it is equivalent
  to the implicit "group by all" behavior.

When combining a bare time series function with other groupings, only grouping functions
(such as [`TBUCKET`](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/tbucket.md)

> or `WITHOUT`) are allowed in the `BY` clause — bare dimension columns are not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or [`WITHOUT`](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/without.md)) are allowed in the `BY` clause — bare dimension columns are not.
```

| STATS SUM(AVG_OVER_TIME(memory_usage)) BY host, TBUCKET(1 hour)
```

### Group by all dimensions implicitly

When a bare time series aggregation function is used without a `BY` clause, results are
implicitly grouped by every dimension and include a `_timeseries` column with the
dimension key/value pairs:

```esql
TS k8s
| STATS avg = avg_over_time(network.cost)
| SORT avg DESC
```

| avg:double | _timeseries:keyword |
| --- | --- |
| 5.18 | `{"cluster":"staging","pod":"one","region":"us"}` |

> | 4.07 | `{"cluster":"prod","pod":"two","region":["eu","us"]}` |

Reviewer: Maybe add a dimension that only shows up in one row, to demonstrate that only applicable dimensions get included.

| ... | ... |

### Exclude dimensions with WITHOUT

Use [`WITHOUT`](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/without.md)
({applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5`) in the `BY` clause to exclude specific dimensions from
the time series grouping. For example, group by every dimension except `pod`:

```esql
TS k8s

> | STATS total_cost = sum(network.cost) BY WITHOUT(pod)

Reviewer: include TBUCKET to show that it's still compatible?

When a bare time series aggregation function is used without a `BY` clause, results are
implicitly grouped by all dimensions of each time series and include a `_timeseries`
column with the dimension key/value pairs. Note how the `qa` cluster rows only carry
`cluster` and `pod` keys, while the `prod` and `staging` rows also include `region` —
only the dimensions that actually exist for a given time series appear in `_timeseries`:

```esql
TS k8s
| STATS avg = avg_over_time(network.cost)
| SORT avg DESC
```

| avg:double | _timeseries:keyword |
| --- | --- |
| 8.375 | `{"cluster":"prod","pod":"three","region":["eu","us"]}` |
| 7.262931034482759 | `{"cluster":"qa","pod":"one"}` |
| 6.870689655172414 | `{"cluster":"qa","pod":"two"}` |
| 6.635416666666667 | `{"cluster":"qa","pod":"three"}` |
| 6.46875 | `{"cluster":"staging","pod":"two","region":"us"}` |
| 5.869791666666667 | `{"cluster":"staging","pod":"three","region":"us"}` |
| 5.586956521739131 | `{"cluster":"prod","pod":"one","region":["eu","us"]}` |
| 5.1826923076923075 | `{"cluster":"staging","pod":"one","region":"us"}` |
| 4.0703125 | `{"cluster":"prod","pod":"two","region":["eu","us"]}` |

### Exclude dimensions with WITHOUT

> Use [`WITHOUT`](/reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/without.md)

Reviewer 2: We can use test backed examples so they are automatically synced once things change e.g. https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146398/changes/01ca6545851feac53d205f5b1816e0d16c57459d

Author: Done!
